Memo-based Pooled Account Support (#1036)
stellar/stellar-protocol: ecosystem/sep-0010.md

Author: Sergey Nebolsin <@nebolsin>, Tom Quisel <tom.quisel@gmail.com>, Leigh McCulloch <@leighmcculloch>, Jake Urban <jake@stellar.org>
Status: Active
Created: 2018-07-31
Updated: 2021-08-10
Version 3.3.0
```

## Simple Summary

This SEP defines the standard way for clients such as wallets or exchanges to create authenticated web sessions on behalf of a user who holds a Stellar account. A wallet may want to authenticate with any web service which requires a Stellar account ownership verification, for example, to upload KYC information to an anchor in an authenticated way as described in [SEP-12](sep-0012.md).

> This SEP also supports authenticating users of shared, omnibus, or pooled Stellar accounts. Clients can use [memos](#memos) or [muxed accounts](../core/cap-0027.md) to distinguish users of these accounts.

Reviewer: 💡 
```suggestion
This SEP also supports authenticating users of shared, omnibus, or pooled Stellar accounts. Clients can use [memos](#memos) or [muxed accounts](../core/cap-0027.md) to distinguish users or sub-accounts of shared accounts.
```

- A **Server**: a server providing the `WEB_AUTH_ENDPOINT` that implements the GET and POST operations discussed in this document. The server's domain may be the **Home Domain**, a sub-domain of the **Home Domain**, or a different domain.
    - The `SIGNING_KEY` from the **Home Domain** is the **Server Account**.
- A **Client**: the software used by the holder of the account being authenticated by the **Server**.

>     - The account being authenticated is the **Client Account**. This can be a Stellar account (`G...`) or a muxed account (`M...`).

Reviewer: 💡 
```suggestion
    - The account being authenticated is the **Client Account**.
    - A Stellar account (`G...`) or a muxed account (`M...`).
```

    - The `SIGNING_KEY` from the **Home Domain** is the **Server Account**.

> - A **Client**: the software used by the holder of the account being authenticated by the **Server**.
>     - The account being authenticated is the **Client Account**.
>     - A Stellar account (`G...`) or a muxed account (`M...`).

Reviewer: 💡 I think this few lines could do with a little tweaking. In the sub-points we discuss the account mostly, not the client, so I think the Client Account deserves it's own top-level point.

I notice we're also missing G+memo from the list of possible values of the Client Account. I think that's important because a G+memo is not authenticating the G alone.

```suggestion
- A **Client Account**: the account being authenticated.
    - A Stellar account (`G...`) or a muxed account (`M...`).
    - If a Stellar account (`G...`), may be accompanied by a memo to scope the authentication to a user or sub-account of the account.
- A **Client**: the software used by the holder of the **Client Account** being authenticated by the **Server**.
```

Name      | Type          | Description
----------|---------------|------------
`account` | `G...` string | The **Client Account**, which can be a stellar account (`G...`) or muxed account (`M...`) that the **Client** wishes to authenticate with the **Server**.

> `memo` | string | (optional) The memo of type `id` to attach to the challenge transaction. Only permitted if a muxed account (`M...`) is not used. `hash` and `text` memos are not supported. See the [Memo](#memos) section for details.

Reviewer: 💡 
```suggestion
`memo` | string | (optional) The memo to attach to the challenge transaction. Only permitted if a stellar account (`G...`) is used. The memo must be of type `id`. Other memo types are not supported. See the [Memo](#memos) section for details.
```

Name      | Type          | Description
----------|---------------|------------
`account` | `G...` string | The stellar account that the **Client** wishes to authenticate with the **Server** 

> `memo` | string | (optional) The memo to attach to the challenge transaction, for `hash` this should be base64-encoded. See the [Memo](#memos) section for details.

Reviewer: ❗ We should use hex encoding for the hash. That's what we do in the lab, and it is more common in general outside of Stellar to hex encode hashes when a string representation is needed.

> `memo_type` | string | (optional) The type of memo to attach to transaction, one of `text`, `id` or `hash`.

Reviewer: ❓ Could we start with supporting only a single memo type, ideally ID, since then it matches muxed accounts. See my other comment about this further up.

  * source account set to the **Server Account**
  * invalid sequence number (set to 0) so the transaction cannot be run on the Stellar network
  * time bounds: `{min: now(), max: now() + 900 }` (we recommend expiration of 15 minutes to give the **Client** time to sign transaction)

>   * memo: derived from the `memo` value passed by the **Client** if specified, omitted otherwise

Reviewer: 💡 Derived sounds like it is transformed or modified, however it is only copied.
```suggestion
  * memo: the `memo` value passed by the **Client** if specified, omitted otherwise
```

        * Add this operation if the server supports [Verifying the Client Domain](#verifying-the-client-domain) and the client provided a `client_domain` parameter in the request.
      * zero or more `manage_data(source: server account, ...)` reserved for future use
  * signature by the **Server Account**

>   * memo: derived from the `memo_type` and `memo` value passed by the **Client** if specified, omitted otherwise

Reviewer: ❗ Can you move this up to after line 129 so that it's inclusion in this list is similar to how we group that data fields in transactions in the XDR and in SDKs?

Upon successful verification, **Server** responds with a session JWT, containing the following claims:

* `iss` (the principal that issued a token, [RFC7519, Section 4.1.1](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.1)) — a [Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)] for the issuer (`https://example.com` or `https://example.com/G...`)

> * `sub` (the principal that is the subject of the JWT, [RFC7519, Section 4.1.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.2)) — there are three possible formats:
>   * If the **Client Account** is a muxed account, the `sub` value should also be the muxed account (`M...`).
>   * If a memo was attached to the challenge transaction, the `sub` should be the Stellar account appended with the memo, separated by a colon (`G...:17509749319012223907`).
>   * If neither of the above conditions are true, the `sub` value should be Stellar account (`G...`).

Reviewer: 💡 Some grouping of the formats might make this easier to pass and digest.
```suggestion
* `sub` (the principal that is the subject of the JWT, [RFC7519, Section 4.1.2](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.2)) — there are several possible formats:
  * If the **Client Account** is a muxed account (`M...`), the `sub` value should be the muxed account (`M...`).
  * If the **Client Account** is a stellar account (`G...`):
     * And, a memo was attached to the challenge transaction, the `sub` should be the stellar account appended with the memo, separated by a colon (`G...:17509749319012223907`).
     * Otherwise, the `sub` value should be Stellar account (`G...`).
```

* `iat` (the time at which the JWT was issued [RFC7519, Section 4.1.6](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.6)) — current timestamp (`1530644093`)
* `exp` (the expiration time on or after which the JWT must not be accepted for processing, [RFC7519, Section 4.1.4](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.4)) — a server can pick its own expiration period for the token (`1530730493`)
* `client_domain` - (optional) a nonstandard JWT claim containing the client home domain, included if the challenge transaction contained a `client_domain` (see [Verifying Client Application Identity](#verifying-client-application-identity))

> * `memo_type` — (optional) the memo type provided in the challenge, one of `text`, `id` or `hash`. See the [Memos](#memos) section for more information.

Reviewer: ❓ Are there use cases where we need to separate authenticating for an account for all memos, vs an account with memo type none? This change doesn't currently support that. How should the memo_type being unset be interpreted?

Author: Now that we're using only memo IDs, there is no need for `memo_type`.

> * `memo` — (optional) the memo provided in the challenge, always of type `string` (even when `memo_type` is equal to `id`) to support parsing the value in languages that don't support big numbers.

Reviewer: 💡 I would make the why a little clearer here, the issue is actually that the format of JWTs, JSON, doesn't support 64-bit integers, not just languages. But what you have is accurate, so I don't feel strongly about this.
```suggestion
* `memo` — (optional) the memo provided in the challenge, always of type `string` even when `memo_type` is equal to `id` (unsigned 64-bit integer) because JSON and some runtimes do not support 64-bit integers.
```

Reviewer: > > The claims in a JWT are normally statements about the subject.
> 
> You also have to squint hard to think that the `memo` and `memo_type` claims are _about_ the shared account holder, since they're really changing the identity of the subject

Claims should be attributes of the subject that have been proven. In the context of SEP-10 the memo isn't an attribute about the account, it's a modifier that changes the scope of authorization. This compels me to think embedding within the sub is more important than I had first thought.

Author: I agree. We'll update the format 👍

> * `memo` — (optional) the memo provided in the challenge, always of type `string` (even when `memo_type` is equal to `id`) to support parsing the value in languages that don't support big numbers.

Reviewer: ❗ One issue we have with making the JWT's identity a sum of `sub`, `memo_type`, and `memo`, is that it is not consistent with [RFC7519 Section 4.1.2] which states that that the `sub` **MUST** uniquely identify the principal being identified.

>The "sub" (subject) claim identifies the principal that is the
>subject of the JWT.  The claims in a JWT are normally statements
>about the subject.  The subject value MUST either be scoped to be
>locally unique in the context of the issuer or be globally unique.
>The processing of this claim is generally application specific.

-- [RFC7519 Section 4.1.2]

[RFC7519 Section 4.1.2]: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7519#section-4.1.2

In the past I think we discussed other designs with we try to encode the memo and memo type into the `sub`, but I don't remember where we landed on that. The `sub` claim must be a string or a URI so unfortunately we can't use a JSON object. We could reconsider a `sub` value in the form `<account>,<memotype>,<memo>`, or similar.

Author: Changing the format of the `sub` string means that users of the `sub` field need to update their parsing logic. In most cases, the only service using the decoded contents of the JWT is the same service that issued the JWT, but I can imagine cases where a service or client has not updated to parse the new format.

Personally I would rather deviate from the RFC spec and the `sub` format unchanged but I don't feel strongly about it.

One question I have about this change is, how would non-shared accounts be represented? Would there be separators in the `sub` string still? I would vote that if we make this change, the separators should always be present:
```
# with "sub" --> "G...,," or "G...,123,id"
>>> account, memo, memo_type = jwt.get("sub").split(",")
```

Otherwise, we'll have to implement logic like so:
```
# with "sub" --> "G..." or "G...,123,id"
>>> account, memo, memo_type = None, None, None
>>> if "," in jwt.get("sub"):
>>>     account, memo, memo_type = jwt.get("sub")
>>> else:
>>>     account = jwt.get("sub")
```

Reviewer: > I can imagine cases where a service or client has not updated to parse the new format

Even with the existing proposal services that aren't updated are likely to contain bugs, since the only way to accurately identify the user is to consume the `sub`, `memo_type`, and `memo` claims. In some ways changing the subject to ensure that the full identity of the user is captured within it may be more resilient to a more catastrophic bug.

---

To answer the question about how this would be implemented, I would take the approach of assuming they could always be present, but ignoring them if they are not:

```go
var account, memo_type, memo string
subParts := strings.SplitN(sub, ",", 3)
account = subParts[0]
if len(subParts) > 1 {
    if len(subParts) < 3 {
        return fmt.Errorf("invalid number of components to jwt subject: %q", sub)
    }
    memo_type = subParts[1]
    memo = subParts[2]
}
```

Author: Thats a good point about un-updated services, and the code above is certainly more resilient. 👍 

I'll update the PR accordingly. Just to make sure: this format should only be used in the `sub` field of the JWT right? Request parameters remain unchanged?

Reviewer: Another way to interpret the RFC is to say that the principal is the shared account holder, who is requesting authentication for one of their users. It's odd because from an applications point-of-view the subject is usually the user, although from a key management perspective it is somewhat accurate because the key holder is the account holder.

Reviewer: > I'll update the PR accordingly. Just to make sure: this format should only be used in the `sub` field of the JWT right? Request parameters remain unchanged?

Yes request parameters can remain unchanged.

I wasn't really meaning to propose this format, but rather highlight maybe we could do something like this. We should maybe consider if there are better formats, although comma-separated is simple to implement.

Another option is to encode the memo into the muxed account strkey format, but that will make it not possible to distinguish muxed accounts from memo accounts in these setups which might not be great.

Author: Thats also true, although I think `sub` needs fully represent the scope of the session based on the specification's definition, and the scope would not be the same for two JWT's that use the same `sub` value but have different `memo` and `memo_type` parameters. 

> The claims in a JWT are normally statements about the subject.

You also have to squint hard to think that the `memo` and `memo_type` claims are _about_ the shared account holder, since they're really changing the identity of the subject, since (account, null, null) and (account, 123, text) describe two distinct entities from the anchor's perspective.

Author: I've updated the `sub` format to be `G...:1234567` in the case of a shared account.

**Servers** may chose which **Client Domains** to verify. If the **Client** requests verification of its domain but the **Server** has no use for verifying that domain, the **Server** should proceed as if the **Client** did not provide the domain in the request for the challenge transaction. If the **Server** attempts but is unable to fetch the `SIGNING_KEY` from the provided **Client Domain**, the **Server** should return a `400 Bad Request` HTTP status code.

### Memos

> Stellar transaction memos are used for a variety of purposes in the ecosystem, but in the context of this standard memos attached to challenge transactions are typically used to distinguish users who share a single Stellar account. This is especially relevant for applications who custody user funds in shared Stellar accounts.

Reviewer: ❗ A couple suggestions here, that I feel a bit stronger about, but let me know your thoughts.

- We should be as clear as possible, even if verbose, about the separation between sessions that use memos.
- Mentioning custody seems unnecessary here.

```suggestion
Stellar transaction memos are used for a variety of purposes in the ecosystem, but in the context of this standard memos attached to challenge transactions distinguish sessions that should be entirely separate, scoped, and detached from each other. Two users who are authenticated with the same Stellar account but different memos should have the same level of separation as two users who are authenticated with different Stellar accounts. Typically the sessions are unique users who share a single Stellar account.
```

#### Memos

Stellar transaction memos are used for a variety of purposes in the ecosystem, but in the context of this standard memos attached to challenge transactions distinguish sessions that should be entirely separate, scoped, and detached from each other. Two users who are authenticated with the same Stellar account but different memos should have the same level of separation as two users who are authenticated with different Stellar accounts. Typically the sessions are unique users who share a single Stellar account, sometimes called an omnibus or pooled account.

The `memo` parameter supported in `GET <WEB_AUTH_ENDPOINT>` API calls is used to communicate to the **Server** that the client intends to authenticate a Stellar account with an additional claim that the account is shared and that the user should be identified using the `account` and `memo` parameters, instead of only using `account`. The value of the `memo` passed will ultimately be added to the decoded JWT's `sub` field, separated from the account address by a colon (`:`).

#### Muxed Accounts

> Note that conceptually, a Stellar account and memo (of type `id`) is equivalent to a muxed account (`M...`) defined in the protocol by [CAP-0027](../core/cap-0027.md) and standardized for use in the ecosystem in [SEP-0023](sep-0023.md). If a SEP-10 implementation supports the use of memos to identify users of shared accounts, it is highly recommended to also support the muxed account address format. Muxed accounts will become the primary method for identifying a user of a shared, omnibus, or pooled account.

Reviewer: 🔠
```suggestion
Conceptually, a Stellar account and memo (of type `id`) is equivalent to a muxed account (`M...`) defined in the protocol by [CAP-0027](../core/cap-0027.md) and standardized for use in the ecosystem in [SEP-0023](sep-0023.md). If a SEP-10 implementation supports the use of memos to identify users of shared accounts, it is highly recommended to also support the muxed account address format. Muxed accounts will become the primary method for identifying a user of a shared, omnibus, or pooled account.
```

### Memos

Stellar transaction memos are used for a variety of purposes in the ecosystem, but in the context of this standard memos attached to challenge transactions distinguish sessions that should be entirely separate, scoped, and detached from each other. Two users who are authenticated with the same Stellar account but different memos should have the same level of separation as two users who are authenticated with different Stellar accounts. Typically the sessions are unique users who share a single Stellar account, sometimes called an omnibus or pooled account.

The `memo` parameter supported in `GET <WEB_AUTH_ENDPOINT>` API calls can be used to communicate to the **Server** that the client intends to authenticate a Stellar account with an additional claim that the account is shared and that the user should be identified using the `account` and `memo` parameters, instead of only using `account`. The value of the `memo` passed will ultimately be added to the decoded JWT's `sub` field, separated from the account address by a colon (`:`).

> Note that conceptually, a Stellar account and memo (of type `id`) is equivalent to a muxed account (`M...`) defined by [CAP-0027](../core/cap-0027.md). If a SEP-10 implementation supports the use of memos to identify users of shared accounts, it is highly recommended to also support the muxed account address format. **Muxed accounts will become the primary (and eventually exclusive) method for identifying a user of a shared, omnibus, or pooled account.**

Reviewer: 💡 I think we should reserve bolding for entities in SEP-10. This sentence is important, but not necessarily more important than other text in the document. 
```suggestion
Note that conceptually, a Stellar account and memo (of type `id`) is equivalent to a muxed account (`M...`) defined by [CAP-0027](../core/cap-0027.md). If a SEP-10 implementation supports the use of memos to identify users of shared accounts, it is highly recommended to also support the muxed account address format. Muxed accounts will become the primary (and eventually exclusive) method for identifying a user of a shared, omnibus, or pooled account.
```

> Note that conceptually, a Stellar account and memo (of type `id`) is equivalent to a muxed account (`M...`) defined by [CAP-0027](../core/cap-0027.md). If a SEP-10 implementation supports the use of memos to identify users of shared accounts, it is highly recommended to also support the muxed account address format. **Muxed accounts will become the primary (and eventually exclusive) method for identifying a user of a shared, omnibus, or pooled account.**

Reviewer: 💡 In a few places we link to CAP-27, but I think SEP-10 would benefit from a section about muxed accounts similar to the memos section. We could link to CAP-27 from within that, and probably SEP-23 too which defines the M address, but could describe inside the SEP what a muxed account means for SEP-10. Wdyt?

Author: Ah I forgot SEP-23 defined the M address format. I can swap links for CAP-27 for SEP-23 but I think we should probably combine the existing Memo section with the muxed account information since their use in SEP-10 is the same.

Reviewer: I think we should link to both. SEP-23 is no longer a proposal for M addresses but a general specification for strkeys.
